README.md, before:

# Containerized Variant Effect Predictor (VEP) + Cache GRCh37/38

&nbsp;+ [Introduction](#Introduction) \
&nbsp;+ [Building image with Singularity](#Building-image-with-Singularity) \
&nbsp;+ [Run VEP](#Run-VEP) \
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;|-- [More options](#More-options) \
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;|-- [Examples](#Examples) \
&nbsp;+ [Filtering by VEP annotations](#Filtering-by-VEP-annotations) \
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;|-- [Options](#Options) \
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;|-- [Filtering examples](#Filtering-examples) \
&nbsp;+ [VEP plugins](#VEP-plugins) \
&nbsp;+ [Build & run VEP with Docker](#Build-&-run-VEP-with-Docker)



## Introduction
This documentation describes the usage of the Docker image at https://hub.docker.com/r/matmu/vep which contains the bioinformatics tool **Ensembl Variant effect predictor (VEP)** for annotating genetic variants. The image comes with

* Merged cache including RefSeq and Ensembl transcripts (VEP parameter --merged required)
* Reference genome and index
* Plugins (annotation data is not included)


## Building image with Singularity
```bash
singularity build vep.<version>.simg docker://matmu/vep:<version>
```

`<version>` is a tag representing the Ensembl version and the species + version of the reference genome. Examples for available versions are **99-GRCh38** (VEP v99 with cache for reference GRCh38) or **99-GRh37** (VEP v99 and cache for reference GRCh37). The version **latest** is always the most recent Ensembl version with cache for reference GRCh38. 

Visit https://hub.docker.com/r/matmu/vep/tags to get a list of all available versions.


## Run VEP
To run VEP execute
```bash
singularity exec vep.<version>.simg vep --merged [options]
```
whereby `<version>` is replaced by a respective version (see above), e.g. `99-CRCh38`. Please **always** use the VEP option `--merged` because only the merged cache including both RefSeq and Ensembl transcripts is installed in the image. 

### More options
The options for base cache/plugin directories, species and assembly are set to the right values by default and do not need to be set by the user.

Visit http://uswest.ensembl.org/info/docs/tools/vep/script/vep_options.html for detailed information about all VEP options. Detailed information about **input/output formats** can be found at https://www.ensembl.org/info/docs/tools/vep/vep_formats.html#defaultout. 

### Examples

#### Test
```bash
singularity exec vep.<version>.simg vep --merged --cache --id rs699        
```

#### Minimum (output format: compress tab)
```bash
singularity exec vep.<version>.simg vep \
        --merged \
        --cache \
        --input_file <filename>.vcf[.gz] \
        --output_file <filename>.txt.gz \
        --tab \
        --compress_output bgzip
```


#### Minimum (output format: compressed vcf)
```bash
singularity exec vep.<version>.simg vep --merged --cache --input_file <filename>.vcf[.gz] --output_file <filename>.vcf.gz --compress_output bgzip
```

#### Full annotation
```bash
singularity exec vep.<version>.simg vep --merged --cache --input_file <filename>.vcf[.gz] --output_file <filename>.vcf.gz --compress_output bgzip --everything --nearest symbol        
```


## Filtering by VEP annotations
The image also includes a VEP filtering script which can be executed by
```bash
singularity exec vep.<version>.simg filter_vep [options]
```

### Options
Visit https://www.ensembl.org/info/docs/tools/vep/script/vep_filter.html for detailed info about available options.


### Filtering examples
#### Filter for rare variants
```bash
singularity exec vep.<version>.simg filter_vep --input_file <filename>.vcf --output_file <filename>.filtered.vcf --only_matched --filter "(IMPACT is HIGH or IMPACT is MODERATE or IMPACT is LOW) and (BIOTYPE is protein_coding) and ((PolyPhen > 0.446) or (SIFT < 0.05)) and (EUR_AF < 0.001 or gnomAD_NFE_AF < 0.001 or (not EUR_AF and not gnomAD_NFE_AF))" 
```


## VEP plugins
TODO


## Build & run VEP with Docker
TODO

Commit message:

update README.md, add Docker section

README.md, after:

# Containerized Variant Effect Predictor (VEP) + Cache GRCh37/38

&nbsp;+ [Introduction](#Introduction) \
&nbsp;+ [Building image with Singularity](#Building-image-with-Singularity) \
&nbsp;+ [Run VEP](#Run-VEP) \
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;|-- [More options](#More-options) \
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;|-- [Examples](#Examples) \
&nbsp;+ [Filtering by VEP annotations](#Filtering-by-VEP-annotations) \
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;|-- [Options](#Options) \
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;|-- [Filtering examples](#Filtering-examples) \
&nbsp;+ [VEP plugins](#VEP-plugins) \
&nbsp;+ [Build & run VEP with Docker](#Build-&-run-VEP-with-Docker)



## Introduction
This documentation describes the usage of the Docker image at https://hub.docker.com/r/matmu/vep which contains the bioinformatics tool **Ensembl Variant effect predictor (VEP)** for annotating genetic variants. The image comes with

* Merged cache including RefSeq and Ensembl transcripts (VEP parameter --merged required)
* Reference genome and index
* Plugins (annotation data is not included)


## Building image with Singularity
```bash
singularity build vep.<version>.simg docker://matmu/vep:<version>
```

`<version>` is a tag representing the Ensembl version and the species + version of the reference genome. Examples for available versions are **99-GRCh38** (VEP v99 with cache for reference GRCh38) or **99-GRh37** (VEP v99 and cache for reference GRCh37). The version **latest** is always the most recent Ensembl version with cache for reference GRCh38. 

Visit https://hub.docker.com/r/matmu/vep/tags to get a list of all available versions.


## Run VEP
To run VEP execute
```bash
singularity exec vep.<version>.simg vep --merged [options]
```
whereby `<version>` is replaced by a respective version (see above), e.g. `99-CRCh38`. Please **always** use the VEP option `--merged` because only the merged cache including both RefSeq and Ensembl transcripts is installed in the image. 

### More options
The options for base cache/plugin directories, species and assembly are set to the right values by default and do not need to be set by the user.

Visit http://uswest.ensembl.org/info/docs/tools/vep/script/vep_options.html for detailed information about all VEP options. Detailed information about **input/output formats** can be found at https://www.ensembl.org/info/docs/tools/vep/vep_formats.html#defaultout. 

### Examples

#### Test
```bash
singularity exec vep.<version>.simg vep --merged --cache --id rs699        
```

#### Minimum (output format: compress tab)
```bash
singularity exec vep.<version>.simg vep \
        --merged \
        --cache \
        --input_file <filename>.vcf[.gz] \
        --output_file <filename>.txt.gz \
        --tab \
        --compress_output bgzip
```


#### Minimum (output format: compressed vcf)
```bash
singularity exec vep.<version>.simg vep --merged --cache --input_file <filename>.vcf[.gz] --output_file <filename>.vcf.gz --compress_output bgzip
```

#### Full annotation
```bash
singularity exec vep.<version>.simg vep --merged --cache --input_file <filename>.vcf[.gz] --output_file <filename>.vcf.gz --compress_output bgzip --everything --nearest symbol        
```


## Filtering by VEP annotations
The image also includes a VEP filtering script which can be executed by
```bash
singularity exec vep.<version>.simg filter_vep [options]
```

### Options
Visit https://www.ensembl.org/info/docs/tools/vep/script/vep_filter.html for detailed info about available options.


### Filtering examples
#### Filter for rare variants
```bash
singularity exec vep.<version>.simg filter_vep --input_file <filename>.vcf --output_file <filename>.filtered.vcf --only_matched --filter "(IMPACT is HIGH or IMPACT is MODERATE or IMPACT is LOW) and (BIOTYPE is protein_coding) and ((PolyPhen > 0.446) or (SIFT < 0.05)) and (EUR_AF < 0.001 or gnomAD_NFE_AF < 0.001 or (not EUR_AF and not gnomAD_NFE_AF))" 
```


## VEP plugins
TODO


## Build & run VEP with Docker
To create and start the container in docker use 

```
docker run -it --name vep.<version> matmu/vep:<version>
```
The option `name` does not have do be used as there is always a default name for a new container but is quite useful for later references. If the image was not downloaded before this will automatically be done in this step.

The usage is similar to the one in singularity. It must be ensured that the container is running. If that is the case, then 
```bash
docker exec -it vep.<version> [command]
```
can be executed. Commands are the same as in the Singularity section.

###Example usage

```bash
docker exec vep.<version> vep --merged --cache --id rs699
```
